Case Study: Safety Controller for Autonomous
Driving on Highways ?
Michael Leuschel , Fabian Vu , and Kristin Rutenkolk
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences
Institute of Computer Science
{leuschel, fabian.vu, kristin.rutenkolk}@uni-duesseldorf.de
Abstract. This requirements document presents the case study for the
ABZ conference 2025. The case study is about a safety controller for
autonomous driving on a highway. The description contains two variations
of the case study. First, in the simpler setting, we just consider a singlelane highway where each vehicle can accelerate and brake. The goal is to
keep a safe distance to the preceding car. Second, we consider a multi-lane
highway where each vehicle can also change lanes.
The challenge is to model the system and its environment, and to derive
assumptions and model a controller for which the safety can be guaranteed.
The challenge is also to present the safety case in such a way that it
is convincing to readers not entirely familiar with the formal method
employed.
The case study is designed such that the formal model can be used as
a safety shield within a highway simulation environment. We provide
pre-trained (unsafe) AI agents, which can be used to experiment with.
This part of the case study is optional.
Keywords: Formal Methods, Autonomous Driving, Case Study, Highway, Artificial Intelligence
Revision History
Version Date Modifications
01 16.10.2024 First version of case study
02 13.11.2024 Added Summary in Section 4,
Added introduction of Section 2.1: Vehicles,
Clarify braking behavior in Section 2.1: Vehicles,
Clarify FASTER in Section 2.1: Vehicles,
Clarify in Section 2.1: Vehicles what a cycle is
Clarify RSS formula in Section 2.4: Safety Requirement
? The work of Fabian Vu is part of the KI-LOK project funded by the “Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie”; grant # 19/21007E, and the IVOIRE project
funded by “Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft” (DFG) and the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) grant # I 4744-N.
2 Leuschel et al.
1 Introduction and Motivation
This requirement document presents the case study for the ABZ conference 2025,
which is about a safety controller for driving vehicles on a highway (motorway
in UK English). In practical use, the safety controller could be employed as an
assistant for a human driver, or can also be added to an artificial intelligence
(AI) component to obtain a safe autonomous driving system.
In practice, cameras and sensors are used to observe the environment of the
vehicle. In the case study, the perception system is abstracted away, i.e., the
controller has access to the vehicle’s position as well as the positions of all cars
in the vicinity. There are no other obstacles on the highway. The challenge of
the case study is to model the driving system with appropriate safety rules that
guarantee safety, i.e., the absence of collisions.
For demonstration but also empirical evaluation purposes, the case study is
combined with a simulated highway environment along with trained reinforcement
learning AI agents based on [6]. We consider two environments specifically: a
single-lane highway where each vehicle can accelerate and brake, and a multi-lane
highway where each vehicle can also change lanes.
With this case study, we ask the following questions:
– Which strategy and assumptions do we need for safe driving?
– Under which conditions is it possible to guarantee complete safety?
– How can we implement those conditions on an autonomous driving system,
and verify and validate the safety?
2 Requirements
This section presents the details of the vehicles, the (single-lane and multi-lane)
environments, and the safety requirements that are considered for this case study.
We build on the highway environment presented by Leurent [6] and configure it
accordingly. The technical details and configuration of the parameters correspond
to [6] as well.
2.1 Vehicles
In the following, we provide environmental requirements for the vehicles.
– VEH1: Every vehicle has a length of l meters.
– VEH2: Every vehicle has a width of w meters.
– VEH3: A vehicle has a maximum speed of vmax m/s
– VEH4: A vehicle has a minimum speed of 0 m/s, i.e., it cannot move
backwards.
– VEH5: A vehicle has a maximum acceleration of amax m/s2
.
– VEH6: A vehicle has a maximum braking deceleration of bmax m/s2
.
Case Study: Safety Controller for Autonomous Driving on Highway 3
– VEH7: A vehicle has a minimum guaranteed braking deceleration of bmin
m/s2
, i.e., if it is braking than the braking deceleration will be between bmin
and bmax, until the point it stops.
Concluding from VEH3, VEH4, and VEH5, the range for the speed is thus
[0, vmax] m/s. Concluding from VEH6 and VEH7, the range of the acceleration
is thus [−bmax, amax] m/s2
, with bmax > 0 and amax > 0.
Note that there are edge cases where the acceleration can be in [−bmin, 0] as
well, e.g., when the difference between a full stop (0 m/s) and the current speed
is less than bmin. For all other cases, the acceleration is in [−bmax, bmin] when
braking and [0, amax] when accelerating.
When using the highway environment from [6], the concrete values for the
parameters above are:
– VEH1-ENV: Each vehicle has a length l of 5 meters.
– VEH2-ENV: Each vehicle has a width w of 2 meters.
– VEH3-ENV: Each vehicle has a maximum speed vmax of 40 m/s (= 144
km/h).
– VEH4-ENV: Each vehicle has a minimum speed of 0 m/s.
– VEH5-ENV: Each vehicle has a maximum acceleration of 5 m/s2
.
– VEH6-ENV: Each vehicle has a maximum braking deceleration of 5 m/s2
.
– VEH7-ENV: Each vehicle has a minimum guaranteed braking deceleration
of 3 m/s2
.
In the following, we describe actions that a controller can perform to control
one or multiple vehicles in the environment. We will use the term cycle as a time
interval in which a vehicle observes its environment, and decides to perform an
action until reaching the next cycle, i.e., until the next observation and decision.
– ACT1: Accelerate (FASTER): This action increases the speed (up to vmax)
with an acceleration up to amax m/s2
. Once the car reaches the vmax the
acceleration is 0m/s2
.
– ACT2: Brake (SLOWER): This action brakes with a braking deceleration of
bmin up to bmax m/s2
. Once the car stops the braking deceleration is 0m/s2
.
– ACT3: Idle (IDLE): This action reduces the (braking) acceleration close to 0
m/s2
.
– ACT4: Change lane to left (LANE_LEFT): This action changes the current
lane of the vehicle to the lane directly left of it within the current cycle. The
acceleration behaves like IDLE.
– ACT5: Change lane to right (LANE_RIGHT): This action changes the current
lane of the vehicle to the lane directly right of it within the current cycle.
The acceleration behaves like IDLE.
Note that the other vehicles also perform these actions, but at different
times. For example, another vehicle could brake for the first half of the cycle and
accelerate in the second half. In Section 3, we provide trained agents configured as
single agents. Instead/additionally, one can also train and configure multi-agents.
4 Leuschel et al.
Also note, that there is no guarantee that FASTER will use the maximal
accleration amax.
Regarding the controller, the following requirement applies:
– CON1: All controlled vehicles observe the environment in a specific time
interval of t, i.e., the response time is t seconds.
Concerning the environment, the requirement is:
– CON1-ENV: All controlled vehicles observe the environment every second,
i.e., the response time is 1 second.
2.2 Single-Lane Environment
Figure 1 shows a visualization of a single-lane environment. Regarding the
environment, the following assumption can be made:
– ENV1: At any time, there are nve vehicles on the highway with nve ≥ 1.
– ENV2: All vehicles drive in the same direction.
In the single-lane environment, the relevant actions are FASTER, SLOWER, and
IDLE.
Fig. 1: Visualization of Single-Lane Environment; figure is created while simulating
in [6].
2.3 Multi-Lane Environment
Figure 2 shows a visualization of a multi-lane environment (with 4 lanes). ENV1
and ENV2 also apply to the multi-lane environment. Additionally, the following
assumption can be made about the environment:
– ENV3: The multi-lane environment consists of a fixed number of lanes nla
with nla ≥ 2.
This means that the number of lanes does not change over time. In addition
to FASTER, SLOWER, and IDLE, actions to change lanes to the left (LANE_LEFT) or
the right (LANE_RIGHT) are also relevant.
Case Study: Safety Controller for Autonomous Driving on Highway 5
Fig. 2: Visualization of Multi-Lane Environment (with 4 lanes); figure is created
while simulating in [6].
2.4 Safety Requirement
This section presents the main safety requirement and a formula to maintain the
safety distance.
The most important safety requirement for the case study is:
– SAF: All controlled vehicles must avoid collisions.
SAF can be achieved by maintaining a safety distance. For the single-lane
environment, one has to consider the distance to the vehicle behind and to
the vehicle in front. For the multi-lane environment, one has to consider lane
changes, and possibly even more rules. The Responsibility-Sensitive Safety (RSS)
model [10] presented by Shalev-Shwartz et al. 1
can be used to maintain safety
distances. In particular, the first rule [10] of RSS defines the computation of the
safety distance as:
dmin = [vr ∗ ρ +
1
2
∗ amax ∗ ρ
2 +
(vr + ρ ∗ amax)
2
2 ∗ βmin
−
v
2
f
2 ∗ βmax
]+
using the notation [x]+ := max{x, 0} and with
– ρ - response time
– vr - speed of rear vehicle
– vf - speed of front vehicle
– amax - maximum acceleration of rear vehicle before braking
– βmax - maximum braking acceleration of front vehicle
– βmin - braking acceleration of rear vehicle (reaction to braking of front
vehicle)
This formula was for example used in [2] with Isabelle to prove safety or
combined with goals in [3, 4]. For the case study, one can also consider other
formulas or assumptions (additionally or instead of RSS) for computing the safety
distance.
1 More details available at: https://www.mobileye.com/technology/responsibili
ty-sensitive-safety/
6 Leuschel et al.
3 Simulation in AI Environment
This section provides additional material, in case you wish to use and evaluate
your safety controller as a safety shield [5] for an AI system. As such, we provide
several reinforcement learning (RL) agents that were trained in the highway
environment [6]. The requirements above were designed in such a way that
the formal model integrates with the abstraction provided by this highway
environment.
Environment
Steering
System
Runtime
Observation
Decision
Making
System
(AI)
Safety
Controller
Action
Safety Enforcement
Act
Fig. 3: Components of Autonomous Driving System
3.1 Overview
Figure 3 depicts using a safety controller for an autonomous driving system. In
practice, the perception is done by cameras and sensors; this is abstracted away
in our case study. We suppose we obtain position and speed information about
vehicles in the vicinity (see Section 3.3 below).
Based on the observations, the decision-making system decides which actions
to execute next. The safety controller checks whether the actions made by the
decision-making system are safe, and intervenes/corrects the decisions accordingly.
The corrected action is then provided to the steering system for execution.
3.2 Trained Agents
We trained agents for both the single-lane and the multi-lane environment with
Deep Q-learning (DQN) [7]. For both environments, we present two agents: an
agent which was trained with penalties for collisions, and another agent which
behaves adversarially, i.e., it is rewarded for collisions.2
The trained agents are available at: https://github.com/hhu-stups/abz
2025_casestudy_autonomous_driving.
2 Additionally, you can also train more agents if required.
Case Study: Safety Controller for Autonomous Driving on Highway 7
Single-Lane Environment. For the single-lane environment, we use the standard
configuration for training, and modify them for both agents as follows:
– The first agent, called Base, is trained with a penalty for collisions, and a
reward vcur/vmax for the current speed (the faster the better).
– The second agent, called Adversarial, is trained with a reward for collisions,
and again a reward depending on the current speed.
Multi-Lane Environment. For the multi-lane environment, we also use the standard configuration for training, and modify them for both agents as follows:
– The first agent, called Base, is trained with a penalty of for collisions, a
right-lane reward (i.e., the car is rewarded if it drives on the right to let other
cars pass), and again a reward for the current speed.
– The second agent, called Adversarial, is trained with a reward for collisions,
again a reward for the current speed, and no right-lane reward but a lane
change reward.
3.3 Observing and Controlling Vehicles in Highway Environment
In the following, we provide information that are only relevant to implement
Figure 3, i.e., to implement an adapter between the agents’ observations and
the safety controller. The details relate to how a controlled vehicle observes its
environment.
Within the highway environment, an agent observes the environment in
each cycle (of 1 second by default) and performs an action (ACT1–ACT5
from Section 2.1). Each observation contains the presence, the positions, and
the speeds of all vehicles. The position and speed of the controlled vehicle
are absolute, while the positions and speeds of the other vehicles are relative
to the controlled vehicle. A controlled vehicle can only observe other vehicles
within a distance of 100m. More details about the environment are available at:
https://highway-env.farama.org/observations/.
3 Such an observation for
a single agent is shown in Figure 4.


P resence x y vx vy
ControlledV ehicle 1.0 0.89 0.50 0.31 0.0
V ehicle2 1.0 0.09 −0.50 −0.04 0.0
V ehicle3 1.0 0.21 0.00 −0.02 0.0
V ehicle4 1.0 0.33 0.00 −0.04 0.0
V ehicle5 1.0 0.43 −0.25 −0.04 0.0


Fig. 4: Example: Observation in Highway Environment
3 There is also a multi-agent setting to control multiple vehicles where the state is
represented by an array of observations: https://highway-env.farama.org/multi_
agent/.
8 Leuschel et al.
3.4 Metrics
In the validation process, one can consider more metrics to evaluate the quality of
an autonomous driving system: the accident rate, the expected time until collision,
the distance traveled, the speed, the cumulative reward (of the reinforcement
learning agent), the time spent on right-most lane according to the keep right
requirement in many countries. Some metrics are described in [12]; they are only
relevant when the safety controller is adapted to the RL agents.
3.5 Some Related Works
The idea of using a simple system to control a complex system was originally
introduced by Sha [9], and later expanded to reinforcement learning applications
[11] in the neural simplex architecture [8]. Figure 3 works similarly to postshielding [1] where the AI’s decisions are corrected. Another approach is preshielding [1] which provides safe actions the AI can choose from.
4 Summary
We expect contributions which
– formalise the behaviour of the vehicles and the effect of the different control
actions (FASTER, SLOWER, ...),
– derive a set of assumptions and rules for which the system is safe,
– formally show the safety of the system under these rules and assumptions.
For this case study we would like to put particular emphasis on a clear
exposition of the models and of the safety argument. Ideally, your argument
should convince somebody not familiar with the particular formal method used
of the safety of the system.
Your solution can target one or both of these settings:
– a single line setting without lane changes,
– a multi-lane setting with possible lane changes.
Another motivation of our case study is applying formal methods to AI to
improve the safety. The main goal here is to develop a formal model that can
superivse an existing AI system. To this end, we provide trained AI agents for
our case study, which can be run in a highway simulation environment and which
can be combined with your formal model (or code generated from your formal
model). We thus encourage to develop a solution
– that can be used as a safety-shield of an AI agent in the highway environment,
– thereby improving safety or even guaranteeing safety,
– while achieving good practical performance (e.g., in terms of total distance
travelled).
Case Study: Safety Controller for Autonomous Driving on Highway 9
Acknowledgements
We thank Amel Mammar and Atif Mashkoor for useful feedback.
References
1. Alshiekh, M., Bloem, R., Ehlers, R., Könighofer, B., Niekum, S., Topcu, U.: Safe
reinforcement learning via shielding. In: Proceedings AAAI. pp. 2669–2678. AAAI
Press (2018). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11797
2. Crisafulli, P., Taha, S., Wolff, B.: Modeling and analysing cyber-physical
systems in HOL-CSP. Robotics Auton. Syst. 170, 104549 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ROBOT.2023.104549
3. Hasuo, I., Eberhart, C., Haydon, J., Dubut, J., Bohrer, R., Kobayashi, T.,
Pruekprasert, S., Zhang, X.Y., Pallas, E.A., Yamada, A., Suenaga, K., Ishikawa,
F., Kamijo, K., Shinya, Y., Suetomi, T.: Goal-aware rss for complex scenarios via
program logic. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles 8(4), 3040–3072 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2022.3169762
4. Kobayashi, T., Bondu, M., Ishikawa, F.: Formal modelling of safety architecture
for responsibility-aware autonomous vehicle via event-b refinement. In: Proceedings
FM’2023. pp. 533–549 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-27481-7_30
5. Könighofer, B., Lorber, F., Jansen, N., Bloem, R.: Shield Synthesis for Reinforcement
Learning. In: Proceedings ISoLA. pp. 290–306. LNCS 12476 (2020), https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-61362-4_16
6. Leurent, E.: An Environment for Autonomous Driving Decision-Making. https:
//github.com/eleurent/highway-env (2018)
7. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M.G.,
Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G., et al.: Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. nature 518(7540), 529–533 (2015),
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236
8. Phan, D.T., Grosu, R., Jansen, N., Paoletti, N., Smolka, S.A., Stoller, S.D.: Neural
simplex architecture. In: Proceedings NFM. pp. 97–114. LNCS 12229 (2020), https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-55754-6_6
9. Sha, L.: Using simplicity to control complexity. IEEE Software 18(4), 20–28 (2001).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2001.936213
10. Shalev-Shwartz, S., Shammah, S., Shashua, A.: On a formal model of safe and
scalable self-driving cars. CoRR abs/1708.06374 (2017), http://arxiv.org/ab
s/1708.06374
11. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.G.: Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press
(2018)
12. Vu, F., Dunkelau, J., Leuschel, M.: Validation of reinforcement learning agents and
safety shields with ProB. In: Proceedings NFM’2024. pp. 279–297. LNCS 14627,
Springer (2024)